Tutorials
=========

In this tutorial, we'll walk through an example where we download a HARPS E2DS
echelle spectrum of Proxima Centauri. We'll also download two spectral
templates -- one for TiO and another for water. We'll then take the
cross-correlation of the TiO template with the stellar spectrum to show that
there is significant TiO absorption in the atmosphere of this M5V star. Lastly,
we'll hunt for cool starspots on the stellar surface by searching for cooler
water absorption in the optical high resolution spectrum via the
cross-correlation.

Loading a spectrum
------------------

First, we need a spectrum to work with, so we'll download a HARPS E2DS spectrum
of Proxima Centauri that's currently hosted on Google Drive using astropy's
`~astropy.utils.data.download_file` function, like so:

.. code-block:: python

    from astropy.utils.data import download_file

    proxima_spectrum_url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1I7E1x1XRjcxXNQXiuaajb_Jz7Wn2N_Eo'
    proxima_spectrum_path = download_file(proxima_spectrum_url)

(you could alternatively use any E2DS spectrum downloaded from the
`ESO Archive <http://archive.eso.org/wdb/wdb/adp/phase3_main/form>`_). We now
have a local copy of the spectrum of Proxima Cen. We can
load this file into an `~hipparchus.EchelleSpectrum` object like so:

.. code-block:: python

    from hipparchus import EchelleSpectrum

    spectrum = EchelleSpectrum.from_e2ds(proxima_spectrum_path)

    spectrum.plot()

.. plot::

    from astropy.utils.data import download_file
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    proxima_spectrum_url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1I7E1x1XRjcxXNQXiuaajb_Jz7Wn2N_Eo'
    proxima_spectrum_path = download_file(proxima_spectrum_url, cache=True,
                                          show_progress=False)

    from hipparchus import EchelleSpectrum

    spectrum = EchelleSpectrum.from_e2ds(proxima_spectrum_path)

    spectrum.plot()
    plt.xlabel('Wavelength [$\AA$]')
    plt.ylabel('Counts')

Continuum normalize
-------------------

Next we might want to continuum normalize each echelle order. We can do that
simply with the `~hipparchus.EchelleSpectrum.continuum_normalize` command:

.. code-block:: python

    spectrum.continuum_normalize()
    spectrum.plot()

.. plot::

    from astropy.utils.data import download_file
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

    proxima_spectrum_url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1I7E1x1XRjcxXNQXiuaajb_Jz7Wn2N_Eo'
    proxima_spectrum_path = download_file(proxima_spectrum_url, cache=True,
                                          show_progress=False)

    from hipparchus import EchelleSpectrum

    spectrum = EchelleSpectrum.from_e2ds(proxima_spectrum_path)

    spectrum.continuum_normalize()
    spectrum.plot()
    plt.xlabel('Wavelength [$\AA$]')
    plt.ylabel('Normalized Flux')
    plt.ylim([0, 1.5])

You can see that the continuum flux is now mostly normalized near unity.

Our spectrum is now ready for cross-correlation business!

Loading a spectral template
---------------------------

Next we need to load spectral templates which we will cross-correlate with the
observed spectrum of Proxima Centauri. We'll be loading emission spectra
generated by Daniel Kitzmann which represent: TiO at 3000 K (roughly the
effective temperature of Proxima Cen), and H2O at 2500 K (roughly the
temperature of hypothesized starspots on Proxima Cen).

First we download the spectral templates:

.. code-block:: python

    from astropy.utils.data import download_file

    template_2500_h2o_url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1RIXBl3L3J_R9PQ-k_0BqAtO-9zYn2mag'
    template_3000_tio_url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1eGUBfk7Q9zaXgJQJtVFB6pit7cmoGCpn'

    template_2500_h2o_path = download_file(template_2500_h2o_url)
    template_3000_tio_path = download_file(template_3000_tio_url)

We now have a local copy of the spectral templates for TiO and water. Let's
load those templates into the `~hipparchus.Template` object:

.. code-block:: python

    from hipparchus import Template

    template_2500_h2o = Template.from_npy(template_2500_h2o_path)
    template_3000_tio = Template.from_npy(template_3000_tio_path)

    template_3000_tio.plot()

.. plot::

    from astropy.utils.data import download_file
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from hipparchus import Template

    template_3000_tio_url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1eGUBfk7Q9zaXgJQJtVFB6pit7cmoGCpn'
    template_3000_tio_path = download_file(template_3000_tio_url, cache=True)
    template_3000_tio = Template.from_npy(template_3000_tio_path)

    template_3000_tio.plot()
    plt.xlabel('Wavelength [$\AA$]')
    plt.ylabel('Template Weighting')

By default the template spectrum is normalized such that it is near zero in the
continuum, and greater than zero in absorption lines. This allows one to easily
compute the cross-correlation via the weighted mean.

Cross correlation
-----------------

So we have a spectrum, and a template. Now let's take the cross-correlation of
the two! We define the cross-correlation function (CCF) for an observed
spectrum :math:`x`, given a template spectrum evaluated at a specific velocity
:math:`T(v)`,

.. math::

    \mathrm{CCF} = \sum_i x_i T_i(v),

where we have normalized the template such that it is positive in molecular
absorption features and near-zero in the continuum, and

.. math::

    \sum_i T_i(v) = 1.

This definition of the CCF is straightforward to interpret: the CCF is a mean
of the flux in each echelle order weighted by the values of the spectral
template. When the velocity :math:`v` is incorrect and/or the template does not
match the observed spectrum, the weighted-mean flux is near unity (continuum).
When the velocity is correct and the template matches absorption features in
the observed spectrum, the absorption features in the spectrum "align" with the
inverse absorption features in the template, and the weighted-mean flux is less
than one. In this way, the CCF yields a "mean absorption line" due to the
molecule specified by the template at the velocity of the star.


Let's compute the CCF between the template and the observed Proxima
Cen spectrum in the echelle order nearest to the wavelength 6800 Angstroms
using the `~hipparchus.cross_corr` function:

.. code-block:: python

    from hipparchus import cross_cor

    ccf = cross_corr(spectrum.nearest_order(6800), template_3000_tio)
    ccf.plot()

.. plot::

    from astropy.utils.data import download_file
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from hipparchus import Template, EchelleSpectrum, cross_corr

    proxima_spectrum_url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1I7E1x1XRjcxXNQXiuaajb_Jz7Wn2N_Eo'
    proxima_spectrum_path = download_file(proxima_spectrum_url, cache=True,
                                          show_progress=False)
    spectrum = EchelleSpectrum.from_e2ds(proxima_spectrum_path)

    template_3000_tio_url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1eGUBfk7Q9zaXgJQJtVFB6pit7cmoGCpn'
    template_3000_tio_path = download_file(template_3000_tio_url, cache=True,
                                           show_progress=False)
    template_3000_tio = Template.from_npy(template_3000_tio_path)

    ccf = cross_corr(spectrum.nearest_order(6800), template_3000_tio)
    ccf.plot()

    plt.xlabel('Radial Velocity [km/s]')
    plt.ylabel('CCF')

We can see a significant "mean absorption line" in the cross-correlation
function of the TiO emission spectrum near the known radial velocity of
Proxima Cen at -22 km/s. This is an unsurprisingly significant detection of
TiO in the atmosphere of the cool star Proxima Centauri.

The `~hipparchus.cross_corr` function returns a `~hipparchus.CCF` object, which
stores the resulting cross-correlation function as a function of velocity and
its metadata.

Hunting for starspots
---------------------

Let's now hunt for starspots on Proxima Centauri. Starspots are cool regions on
stellar surfaces where strong magnetic fields inhibit convection. Since
starspots are cooler than the rest of the stellar photosphere, they may have
molecular absorption features that don't occur elsewhere on the star.
Proxima Centauri, for example, is a 3000 K star. At 3000 K, we don't expect to
see significant absorption due to water molecules, but water begins to show
absorption features in the optical at and below 2500 K at wavelengths
greater than 5800 Angstroms. So let's cross-correlate each order of the Proxima
Centauri echelle spectrum with the high resolution template for water at 2500 K
to see if there is significant starspot coverage on Proxima Centauri with
temperatures :math:`\Delta T \sim 500` K:

.. code-block:: python

    counter = -1
    for order in spectrum.orders:
        if order.wavelength.mean() > 5800:
            counter += 1
            ccf = cross_corr(order, template_2500_h2o)
            ccf.plot(label='{0:.0f} $\AA$'.format(order.wavelength.mean()),
                     color=plt.cm.magma(counter/20))
    plt.legend(loc='lower right', fontsize=8)
    plt.xlabel('$\Delta v$ [km/s]')
    plt.ylabel('CCF')

.. plot::

    from astropy.utils.data import download_file
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from hipparchus import Template, EchelleSpectrum, cross_corr

    proxima_spectrum_url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1I7E1x1XRjcxXNQXiuaajb_Jz7Wn2N_Eo'
    proxima_spectrum_path = download_file(proxima_spectrum_url, cache=True,
                                          show_progress=False)
    spectrum = EchelleSpectrum.from_e2ds(proxima_spectrum_path)

    template_2500_h2o_url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1RIXBl3L3J_R9PQ-k_0BqAtO-9zYn2mag'
    template_2500_h2o_path = download_file(template_2500_h2o_url, cache=True,
                                           show_progress=False)
    template_2500_h2o = Template.from_npy(template_2500_h2o_path)

    counter = -1
    for order in spectrum.orders:
        if order.wavelength.mean() > 5800:
            counter += 1
            ccf = cross_corr(order, template_2500_h2o)
            ccf.plot(label='{0:.0f} $\AA$'.format(order.wavelength.mean()),
                     color=plt.cm.magma(counter/20))
    plt.legend(loc='lower right', fontsize=8)
    plt.xlabel('$\Delta v$ [km/s]')
    plt.ylabel('CCF')

The CCF of each spectral order is shown with a different color curve.
You can see that there are no spectral orders which show significant absorption
at the radial velocity of Proxima Centauri (-22 km/s). This suggests there is
not significant absorption due to water vapor in the atmosphere of Proxima Cen.
This could suggest there is insignificant coverage by cool spots, the spots are
hotter than 2500 K, or some combination of both scenarios.
